Viva Questions and Answers: CRUD API using Node.js, Express.js, and MongoDB

🔹 Basics (Node.js & Express.js)

What is an API?API (Application Programming Interface) is a set of rules that allow one software or component to interact with another. For example, an API lets your frontend (React/HTML) talk to the backend (Node.js).

What are CRUD operations?CRUD stands for Create, Read, Update, and Delete — the four basic operations for managing data.

What is Express.js and why is it used?Express.js is a Node.js framework used to build web servers easily. It provides routing, middleware, and tools to handle HTTP requests.

How do you create a server using Express.js?By importing Express and using app.listen(PORT) to start listening for requests. Example:

const express = require('express');
const app = express();
app.listen(3000, () => console.log('Server running'));

What is routing in Express.js?Routing defines how the server responds to various HTTP requests (GET, POST, etc.).
Example:

app.get('/users', (req, res) => res.send('All users'));

🔹 MongoDB Basics

What is MongoDB?MongoDB is a NoSQL database that stores data in JSON-like documents (BSON).

What is a collection and a document in MongoDB?

Collection = Table (holds multiple documents)

Document = Row (actual data in key-value format)

How do you connect MongoDB with Node.js?Using Mongoose:

mongoose.connect('mongodb://localhost/mydb', {...})

What is Mongoose and why do we use it?Mongoose is an ODM (Object Data Modeling) library for MongoDB and Node.js. It simplifies data validation and modeling.

What is a Schema in Mongoose?A Schema defines the structure of the documents. Example:

const UserSchema = new mongoose.Schema({ name: String, age: Number });

🔹 CRUD API Questions

What does the Create API do in your project?It adds new assignment data to the database using a POST request.

What HTTP method is used for creating data?POST.

What does the Read API return?It returns the list of all assignments stored in the database.

What is the purpose of the Update API?To modify existing assignment data using PUT or PATCH.

How does the Delete API work in your code?It removes assignment data using a DELETE request based on ID.

🔹 Code & Implementation

How is data stored in MongoDB from your API?Data is first captured from the request body, then saved using new Model(data).save().

What does app.use(express.json()) do?It parses incoming JSON requests and makes the data available in req.body.

How do you handle errors in your APIs?Using try-catch blocks and sending appropriate status codes and messages.

What is the difference between req.params and req.body?

req.params: Used to get route parameters like ID

req.body: Used to get data from POST/PUT requests

How do you test your API?Using Postman or any REST client by sending requests to endpoints.

🔹 Advanced Concepts

What is RESTful API?A RESTful API follows REST principles using HTTP methods for operations and clear endpoints.

What is the role of Postman in your project?To test APIs by sending requests and checking responses.

How can you secure your API?Using authentication (JWT), validation, rate-limiting, and CORS.

What status codes do you return in your responses?

200: OK

201: Created

400: Bad Request

404: Not Found

500: Server Error

How do you ensure only valid data is inserted into the database?Using Mongoose validation in Schema (e.g., required fields, types).

