What is Node.js?
Node.js is a runtime that allows you to run JavaScript on the server-side (outside the browser). It's built on Chrome’s V8 engine. You can use it to build servers, APIs, and apps.

Why is Node.js used in web development?
Because it's fast, lightweight, and handles many connections at once. It's great for real-time apps like chat, and it uses the same language (JavaScript) on both client and server.

How is Node.js different from traditional web servers like Apache?
Node.js is event-driven and non-blocking (asynchronous), while Apache is multi-threaded and blocking. Node handles more connections using fewer resources.

What are the advantages of using Node.js?

Fast execution (V8 engine)

Asynchronous I/O

Uses JavaScript (easy learning curve)

Large community with many packages (npm)

📌 Express.js
What is Express.js?
Express is a minimal and flexible Node.js framework that makes building web apps easy. It handles routing, requests, responses, and middleware.

Why do we use Express in a Node.js application?
It simplifies routing, reduces boilerplate code, and adds powerful features like middleware and templates.

What is express.static() and how does it work?
It’s a middleware that tells Express to serve static files (like HTML, CSS, JS) from a folder. Example:
app.use(express.static("public")) serves everything in the public/ folder.

How do you create a basic Express server?

js
Copy
Edit
const express = require('express');
const app = express();
app.use(express.static('public'));
app.listen(3000, () => console.log("Server running"));
📌 Static Website Serving
What are static files in a website?
Files that do not change dynamically — like .html, .css, .js, images. These are sent directly to the client by the server.

Why do we use the public folder in Express?
It’s a common convention. You place all your static content inside this folder and Express automatically serves it.

What will happen if you forget to use express.static()?
The browser won’t be able to load your HTML, CSS, JS files. You’ll get a 404 error.

📌 Project Structure
What should be inside the public folder?

index.html (your homepage)

styles.css (your styling)

script.js (any front-end JS logic)

What is the role of index.html in a static site?
It's the default file served by the server. It’s the entry point of your website.

Can you explain the folder structure of your project?

pgsql
Copy
Edit
my-app/
├── public/        ← all frontend files
│   ├── index.html
│   ├── styles.css
│   └── script.js
├── server.js      ← backend code
└── package.json   ← project metadata
📌 Running the Server
How do you start your Node.js server?
Open terminal and run:
node server.js

What is the use of npm init?
It creates a package.json file, which stores your project details and dependencies.

What is the role of package.json?
It keeps info like project name, version, scripts, and all installed packages (like Express).

What does npm install express do?
It installs the Express.js package and adds it to package.json so others can install it too.

📌 Ports and Hosting
What is a port number in a Node.js app?
It’s like a door to your computer. Port 3000 means your app listens at localhost:3000. Only one app can use one port at a time.

Why do we use localhost:3000?
localhost is your own computer, and 3000 is a common dev port. It means the server runs on your local machine.

📌 JavaScript & Backend
Can Node.js handle backend logic like databases and authentication?
Yes, Node.js can connect to databases like MongoDB, MySQL, etc. You can also handle authentication, API calls, and more.

What is the difference between static and dynamic websites?

Static: Same content every time (just files)

Dynamic: Content changes based on user input or database (e.g., Facebook)

📌 Deployment & Debugging
How would you deploy your Node.js application?

Use services like Render, Heroku, or Vercel

Push code to GitHub

Connect to the platform and deploy

How do you debug issues if your static files aren’t loading?

Check express.static() usage

Check folder name and path

Use browser DevTools → Network tab

Look for 404 errors in console

📌 Memory-Based Tip
If Node is a waiter, what is the kitchen and what are the dishes?

Node = Waiter

public folder = Kitchen

HTML, CSS files = Dishes

Browser = Customer receiving dishes